So far, I've emphasized that you'll
generally work with an existing LLM as you
develop your application.
This saves you a lot of time and can get
you to a working prototype much faster.
However, there's one situation where you
may find it necessary to pretrain your own
model from scratch.
If your target domain uses vocabulary and
language structures that are not
commonly used in day to day language.
You may need to perform domain adaptation
to achieve good model performance.
For example, imagine you're a developer
building an app to help lawyers and
paralegals summarize legal briefs.
Legal writing makes use of very
specific terms like mens rea in
the first example and
res judicata in the second.
These words are rarely used outside of
the legal world, which means that they
are unlikely to have appeared widely
in the training text of existing LLMs.
As a result, the models may have
difficulty understanding these terms or
using them correctly.
Another issue is that legal language
sometimes uses everyday words
in a different context,
like consideration in the third example.
Which has nothing to do with being nice,
but instead refers to the main element of
a contract that makes
the agreement enforceable.
For similar reasons,
you may face challenges if you try to use
an existing LLM in a medical application.
Medical language contains many uncommon
words to describe medical conditions and
procedures.
And these may not appear frequently
in training datasets consisting of
web scrapes and book texts.
Some domains also use language
in a highly idiosyncratic way.
This last example of medical language
may just look like a string of random
characters, but it's actually a shorthand
used by doctors to write prescriptions.
This text has a very clear
meaning to a pharmacist,
take one tablet by mouth four times a day,
after meals and at bedtime.
Because models learn their vocabulary and
understanding of language through
the original pretraining task.
Pretraining your model from scratch
will result in better models for
highly specialized domains like law,
medicine, finance or science.
Now let's return to BloombergGPT,
first announced in 2023 in
a paper by Shijie Wu, Steven Lu,
and colleagues at Bloomberg.
BloombergGPT is an example of a large
language model that has been pretrained
for a specific domain,
in this case, finance.
The Bloomberg researchers chose
to combine both finance data and
general purpose tax data to pretrain
a model that achieves Bestinclass
results on financial benchmarks.
While also maintaining competitive
performance on general purpose LLM
benchmarks.
As such, the researchers chose data
consisting of 51% financial data and
49% public data.
In their paper,
the Bloomberg researchers describe
the model architecture in more detail.
They also discuss how they started with
a chinchilla scaling laws for guidance and
where they had to make tradeoffs.
These two graphs compare a number of LLMs,
including BloombergGPT,
to scaling laws that have been
discussed by researchers.
On the left, the diagonal lines trace
the optimal model size in billions
of parameters for
a range of compute budgets.
On the right, the lines trace the compute
optimal training data set size
measured in number of tokens.
The dashed pink line on each graph
indicates the compute budget that
the Bloomberg team had available for
training their new model.
The pink shaded regions correspond to the
compute optimal scaling loss determined in
the Chinchilla paper.
In terms of model size, you can see
that BloombergGPT roughly follows
the Chinchilla approach for the given
compute budget of 1.3 million GPU hours,
or roughly 230,000,000 petaflops.
The model is only a little bit
above the pink shaded region,
suggesting the number of parameters
is fairly close to optimal.
However, the actual number of tokens used
to pretrain BloombergGPT 569,000,000,000
is below the recommended Chinchilla
value for the available compute budget.
The smaller than optimal training data
set is due to the limited availability of
financial domain data.
Showing that real world constraints
may force you to make trade offs when
pretraining your own models.
Congratulations on making
it to the end of week one,
you've covered a lot of ground, so let's
take a minute to recap what you've seen.
Mike walked you through some of
the common use cases for LLMs,
such as essay writing,
dialogue summarization and translation.
He then gave a detailed presentation of
the transformer architecture that powers
these models.
And discussed some of the parameters you
can use at inference time to influence
the model's output.
He wrapped up by introducing you to
a generative AI project lifecycle that you
can use to plan and
guide your application development work.
Next, you saw how models are trained
on vast amounts of text data
during an initial training
phase called pretraining.
This is where models develop
their understanding of language.
You explored some of the computational
challenges of training these models,
which are significant.
In practice because of
GPU memory limitations,
you will almost always use some form of
quantization when training your models.
You finish the week with a discussion of
scaling laws that have been discovered for
LLMs and how they can be used to
design compute optimal models.
If you'd like to read more of the details,
be sure to check out this
week's reading exercises.